---
layout: post
title: Predicting road accidents among Fleetrisk Drivers
---

**General Assembly Data Science Final Project**  <br />  <br />  Bad drivers cost insurers and transportation companies such as [Uber](http://www.uber.com), money. Predicting which drivers will have accidents though, is difficult. [Academic research](https://eprints.qut.edu.au/47282/2/47282.pdf), on the impact of driver personality and cognitive skills has focused on mature age drivers and is untested against actual driving behavior. 

[Fleetrisk](www.fleetrisk.com) screens new drivers based on several cognitive, emotional and personality tests. In the provided dataset, 394 drivers were screened and subsequently monitored for several months on daily road trips, with telematics data collected from sensors fitted to their cars. 52 of these drivers had one or more road accidents over this period. Could we have made use of Feetrisk data to determine which drivers were more likely to have accidents, or to ascertain which of the "good" drivers haven't had an accident yet?

**Fleetrisk Data**

Transport companies hire Fleetrisk to administer tests, similar in fashion to computerized hazard perception tests, to rank employed drivers by cognitive, empathy and personality traits. Driver's vehicles are fitted with sensors which monitor every speeding, accelerating, braking and cornering event and the speed at which these events occur. Drivers do not receive real time feedback while driving and are assumed, over time, to revert back to their normal driving patterns.

The longer people drive, the greater the likelihood of an accident. Fleetrisk records each accident claim made by every driver involved in a roadside incident. For every accident, we have data on the _date_, _severity_ and _cost_ of the accident among other variables. Whether the driver was at fault or not was not recorded.

Looking at the correlation between cognitive, empathy and personality scores with number of accidents, we note unanimously low correlations.

**Takeaways**

1. Drive slower
2. High reaction speed drivers in particular need to drive slower.

**Cost Function**

Only 13% of all drivers in our sample had an accident. An estimator that predicted all 394 drivers were accident free would have an 87% accuracy. This is a typical example of an imbalanced class problem, and traditional techniques to accomodate this such as upsampling the minority class would end up skewing our results.

Instead, we design our cost function around misclassifying good and bad drivers. The cost to Fleetrisk of advertising for an vetting drivers for transportation companies is $25. The median cost of an accident is $2200. Put another way, if we were to reject a driver because we believed they were going to have an accident, but they were actually a good driver, it would cost Fleetrisk $25. On the other hand if we vetted a driver as being "good" but they then went on to have an accident, the cost to Fleetrisk would be $2200. 

<style>
.tablelines table, .tablelines td, .tablelines th {
        border: 1px solid black;
        }
</style>

Predict   | Actual   | Cost
--------- | -------- | ------
Bad       |  Good    | $25
Good      |  Bad     | $2200
{: .tablelines}

Note the penalty associated with bad drivers in this case is 100 times greater than with good drivers, so we've adjusted for our imbalanced class problem.

----
****
